Mozilla (stylized as moz://a) is a free software community founded in 1998 by members of Netscape.
The Mozilla community uses, develops, spreads and supports Mozilla products, thereby promoting
exclusively free software and open standards, with only minor exceptions. The community is
supported institutionally by the non-profit Mozilla Foundation and its tax-paying subsidiary, the
Mozilla Corporation.

Mozilla's current products include the Firefox web browser, Thunderbird e-mail client (now
through a subsidiary), Bugzilla bug tracking system, Gecko layout engine, Pocket
"read-it-later-online" service, and others.

The Mozilla Manifesto outlines Mozilla's goals and principles. It asserts Mozilla's commitment to
the internet, saying: "The open, global internet is the most powerful communication and
collaboration resource we have ever seen. It embodies some of our deepest hopes for human
progress." It then outlines what Mozilla sees as its place in the development of the internet,
stating "The Mozilla project uses a community-based approach to create world-class open source
software and to develop new types of collaborative activities". And finally, it lays out their
ten principles:

    The internet is an integral part of modern life—a key component in education, communication, collaboration, business, entertainment, and society as a whole.
    The internet is a global public resource that must remain open and accessible.
    The internet must enrich the lives of individual human beings.
    Individuals’ security and privacy on the internet are fundamental and must not be treated as optional.
    Individuals must have the ability to shape the internet and their own experiences on it.
    The effectiveness of the internet as a public resource depends upon interoperability (protocols, data formats, content), innovation, and decentralized participation worldwide.
    Free and open source software promotes the development of the internet as a public resource.
    Transparent community-based processes promote participation, accountability, and trust.
    Commercial involvement in the development of the internet brings many benefits; a balance between commercial profit and public benefit is critical.
    Magnifying the public benefit aspects of the internet is an important goal, worthy of time, attention, and commitment.
    According to the Mozilla Foundation:[27]

    The Mozilla Foundation pledges to support the Mozilla Manifesto in its activities. Specifically, we will:

        Build and enable open-source technologies and communities that support the Manifesto’s principles;
        Build and deliver great consumer products that support the Manifesto’s principles;
        Use the Mozilla assets (intellectual property such as copyrights and trademarks, infrastructure, funds, and reputation) to keep the Internet an open platform;
        Promote models for creating economic value for the public benefit; and
        Promote the Mozilla Manifesto principles in public discourse and within the Internet industry.

Firefox is a family of software products developed by Mozilla, with the Firefox browser as the
flagship product.

Firefox browser, or simply Firefox, is a web browser and Mozilla's flagship software product. It
is available in both desktop and mobile versions. Firefox uses the Gecko layout engine to render
web pages, which implements current and anticipated web standards. As of late 2015, Firefox
had approximately 10-11% of worldwide usage share of web browsers, making it the 4th most-used
web browser.

Firefox began as an experimental branch of the Mozilla codebase by Dave Hyatt, Joe Hewitt and
Blake Ross. They believed the commercial requirements of Netscape's sponsorship and
developer-driven feature creep compromised the utility of the Mozilla browser.
To combat what they saw as the Mozilla Suite's software bloat, they created a stand-alone 
browser, with which they intended to replace the Mozilla Suite.

Firefox was originally named Phoenix but the name was changed so as to avoid trademark conflicts
with Phoenix Technologies. The initially-announced replacement, Firebird, provoked objections from
the Firebird project community. The current name, Firefox, was chosen on February 9, 2004.

It was previously announced that Mozilla is going to launch a premium version of the Firefox
browser by October 2019. The company's CEO, Chris Beard, has been quoted by The Next Web to say
that "there is no plan to charge money for things that are now free. So we will roll out a
subscription service and offer a premium level." In September, Mozilla revealed their new
offering, Firefox Premium Support, priced at $10 per installation. However, shortly after
news broke of the service, Mozilla removed information about the service from the website.
Computerworld reported that in an email statement, Mozilla claimed "the page outlining that these
paid support services for enterprise clients will be available was posted incorrectly."


Firefox for mobile (codenamed Fennec) is the build of the Mozilla Firefox web browser for mobile
devices such as smartphones and tablet computers. Initially available on multiple platforms, it is
now available in two versions: Firefox for Android and Firefox for iOS. Firefox for Android runs
on the Android mobile operating system and uses the same Gecko layout engine as Mozilla Firefox;
for example, version 1.0 used the same engine as Firefox 3.6, and the following release, 4.0,
shared core code with Firefox 4.0. Firefox for iOS, which runs on the iOS mobile operating system,
does not use the Gecko Layout Engine because of Apple's policy that all iOS apps that browse the
web must use the built-in iOS WebKit rendering engine. Both version include features like
HTML5 support, Firefox Sync, private browsing, web tracking protection, and tabbed browsing, and
Firefox for Android also includes support for add-ons.


Firefox Focus is a free and open-source privacy-focused mobile browser for Android and iOS.
Initially released in 2015 as only a tracker-blocking application for iOS, it has since been
developed into a full mobile browser for both iOS and Android.


Firefox Lockwise was a password manager offered by Mozilla. On desktop, it was a built-in featur
of the Firefox browser. On mobile, it was offered as a standalone app that can be set as the
device's default password manager.


Firefox Monitor is an online service that informs users if their email address and passwords have
been leaked in data breaches.


Firefox Send was an online encrypted file-transfer service offered by Mozilla. In September 2020,
Mozilla announced that Firefox Send will be decommissioned and will no longer be part of the
product lineup.


Mozilla VPN, formerly Firefox Private Network, is a subscription-based VPN and a free privacy
extension.

Firefox Private Relay provides users with disposable email addresses that can be used to combat
spam (by hiding the user's real email address) and manage email subscriptions by categorizing them
based on the party a particular address was given to.

In September 2018, Mozilla announced that its VR version was ready for consumers to download.
Called Firefox Reality, the browser was built entirely for virtual reality. It is currently
available on the Oculus.

In January 2019, HTC also announced its partnership with Mozilla. Under the partnership, the
Firefox Reality web browser has been made available on the Vive headsets.


Firefox OS (project name: Boot to Gecko also known as B2G) is a free software operating system
that was developed by Mozilla to support HTML5 apps written using "open Web" technologies rather
than platform-specific native APIs. The concept behind Firefox OS is that all user-accessible
software will be HTML5 applications, that use Open Web APIs to access the phone's hardware directly
via JavaScript.

Some devices using this OS include Alcatel One Touch Fire, ZTE Open, and LG Fireweb. Mozilla
announced the end of Firefox OS development in December 2015.

A fork of B2G, KaiOS, has continued development and ships with numerous low-cost devices.


Pocket is a mobile application and web service for managing a reading list of articles from the
Internet. It was announced that it would be acquired by the Mozilla Corporation, the commercial
arm of Mozilla's non-profit development group, on February 27, 2017. Originally designed only
for desktop browsers, it is now available for macOS, Windows, iOS, Android, Windows Phone,
BlackBerry, Kobo eReaders, and web browsers.


Thunderbird is a free software, cross-platform email and news client developed by the volunteers
of the Mozilla Community.

On July 16, 2012, Mitchell Baker announced that Mozilla's leadership had come to the conclusion
that ongoing stability was the most important thing for Thunderbird and that innovation in
Thunderbird was no longer a priority for Mozilla. In that update, Baker also suggested that
Mozilla had provided a pathway for its community to innovate around Thunderbird if the community
chooses.


SeaMonkey (formerly the Mozilla Application Suite) is a free and open-source cross-platform suite
of Internet software components including a web browser component, a client for sending and
receiving email and Usenet newsgroup messages, an HTML editor (Mozilla Composer) and the ChatZilla
IRC client.

On March 10, 2005, the Mozilla Foundation announced that it would not release any official
versions of Mozilla Application Suite beyond 1.7.x, since it had now focused on the stand-alone
applications Firefox and Thunderbird.[61] SeaMonkey is now maintained by the SeaMonkey Council,
which has trademarked the SeaMonkey name with help from the Mozilla Foundation.[62] The Mozilla
Foundation provides project hosting for the SeaMonkey developers.


Bugzilla is a web-based general-purpose bug tracking system, which was released as free software
by Netscape Communications in 1998 along with the rest of the Mozilla codebase, and is currently
stewarded by Mozilla. It has been adopted by a variety of organizations for use as a bug tracking
system for both free and open-source software and proprietary projects and products, including the
Mozilla Foundation, the Linux kernel, KDE, Red Hat, Eclipse and LibreOffice.
WebThings

WebThings is a framework that allowed management of IoT devices through a single framework,
gateway and UI.[64][65][66] It was based on W3C Web of Things standard. As of 2020, it is no
longer affiliated with Mozilla.[67] It was spinner of as independent project during 2020 layoff
of 250 employees. It was known as Project Things and allowed users to use a raspberry pi as a
gateway for IoT management with decentralized software.


Network Security Services (NSS) comprises a set of libraries designed to support cross-platform
development of security-enabled client and server applications. NSS provides a complete free
software implementation of crypto libraries supporting SSL and S/MIME. NSS is licensed under the
GPL-compatible Mozilla Public License 2.0.

AOL, Red Hat, Sun Microsystems/Oracle Corporation, Google and other companies and individual
contributors have co-developed NSS and it is used in a wide range of non-Mozilla products
including Evolution, Pidgin, and LibreOffice.


SpiderMonkey is the original JavaScript engine developed by Brendan Eich when he invented
JavaScript in 1995 as a developer at Netscape. It became part of the Mozilla product family when
Mozilla inherited Netscape's code-base in 1998. In 2011, Eich transferred the nominal ownership of
the SpiderMonkey code and project to Dave Mandelin.

SpiderMonkey is a cross-platform engine written in C++ which implements ECMAScript, a standard
developed from JavaScript. It comprises an interpreter, several just-in-time compilers, a
decompiler and a garbage collector. Products which embed SpiderMonkey include Firefox,
Thunderbird, SeaMonkey, and many non-Mozilla applications.
Rhino

Rhino is a free software JavaScript engine managed by the Mozilla Foundation. It is developed
entirely in Java. Rhino converts JavaScript scripts into Java classes. Rhino works in both
compiled and interpreted mode.

Gecko is a layout engine that supports web pages written using HTML, SVG, and MathML. Gecko is
written in C++ and uses NSPR for platform independence. Its source code is licensed under the
Mozilla Public License.

Firefox uses Gecko both for rendering web pages and for rendering its user interface. Gecko is
also used by Thunderbird, SeaMonkey, and many non-Mozilla applications.


Rust is a compiled programming language being developed by Mozilla Research. It is designed for
safety, concurrency, and performance. Rust is intended for creating large and complex software
which needs to be both safe against exploits and fast.

Rust is being used in an experimental layout engine, Servo, which was developed by Mozilla and
Samsung. Servo is not used in any consumer-oriented browsers yet. However, the Servo project
developers plan for parts of the Servo source code to be merged into Gecko, and Firefox,
incrementally.


XULRunner is a software platform and technology experiment by Mozilla, that allows applications
built with the same technologies used by Firefox extensions (XPCOM, Javascript, HTML, CSS, XUL)
to be run natively as desktop applications, without requiring Firefox to be installed on the
user's machine. XULRunner binaries are available for the Windows, Linux and OS X operating
systems, allowing such applications to be effectively cross-platform.


Pdf.js is a library developed by Mozilla that allows in-browser rendering of pdf documents using
HTML5 Canvas and JavaScript. It is included by default in Firefox, allowing the browser to render
pdf documents without requiring an external plugin; and it is available separately as an extension
named "PDF Viewer" for Firefox for Android, SeaMonkey, and the Firefox versions which don't
include it built-in. It can also be included as part of a website's scripts, to allow pdf
rendering for any browser that implements the required HTML5 features and can run JavaScript.

Shumway is a free software replacement for the Adobe Flash Player, developed by Mozilla since
2012, using open web technologies as a replacement for Flash technologies. It uses Javascript and
HTML5 Canvas elements to render Flash and execute Actionscript. It is included by default in
Firefox Nightly and can be installed as an extension for any recent version of Firefox. The
current implementation is limited in its capabilities to render Flash content outside simple
projects.


Servo is a browser engine being developed for application and embedded use. In August 2020, during
the COVID-19 pandemic, due to lack of funds and organization restructuring, Mozilla laid off most
of the Servo development team. After the team was disbanded, Servo became part of the Linux
Foundation, where development currently continues.

sops is an editor of encrypted files that supports YAML, JSON, ENV, INI and BINARY formats and
encrypts with AWS KMS, GCP KMS, Azure Key Vault, age, and PGP.

WebXR Viewer is an AR viewer that lets a developer create and run AR experiences built with web
technologies and ARKit.